Sonnet 1

O Nightingale, that on yon bloomy Spray
Warbl'st at eeve, when all the Woods are still,
Thou with fresh hope the Lovers heart dost fill,
While the jolly hours lead on propitious May,

Thy liquid notes that close the eye of Day, 
First heard before the shallow Cuccoo's bill
Portend success in love; O if Jove's will
Have linkt that amorous power to thy soft lay,

Now timely sing, ere the rude Bird of Hate
Foretell my hopeles doom in som Grove ny: 
As thou from yeer to yeer hast sung too late

For my relief; yet hadst no reason why,
Whether the Muse, or Love call thee his mate,
Both them I serve, and of their train am I.



Sonnet 7

How soon hath Time the suttle theef of youth,
Stoln on his wing my three and twentieth yeer!
My hasting dayes flie on with full career,
But my late spring no bud or blossom shew'th.

Perhaps my semblance might deceive the truth, 
That I to manhood am arriv'd so near,
And inward ripenes doth much less appear,
That som more timely-happy spirits indu'th.

Yet be it less or more, or soon or slow,
It shall be still in strictest measure eev'n 
To that same lot, however mean, or high,

Toward which Time leads me, and the will of Heav'n;
All is, if I have grace to use it so,
As ever in my great task Masters eye.








Sonnet 8

Captain or Colonel, or Knight in Arms,
Whose chance on these defenceless dores may sease,
If ever deed of honour did thee please,
Guard them, and him within protect from harms,

He can requite thee, for he knows the charms 
That call Fame on such gentle acts as these,
And he can spred thy Name o're Lands and Seas,
What ever clime the Suns bright circle warms.

Lift not thy spear against the Muses' Bowre,
The great Emathian Conqueror bid spare 
The house of Pindarus, when Temple and Towre

Went to the ground: and the repeated air
Of sad Electra's Poet had the power
To save th' Athenian Walls from ruine bare.








Sonnet 9

Lady that in the prime of earliest youth,
Wisely hast shun'd the broad way and the green,
And with those few art eminently seen,
That labour up the Hill of heav'nly Truth,

The better part with Mary, and with Ruth, 
Chosen thou hast, and they that overween,
And at thy growing vertues fret their spleen,
No anger find in thee, but pity and ruth.

Thy care is fixt and zealously attends
To fill thy odorous Lamp with deeds of light, 
And Hope that reaps not shame. Therefore be sure

Thou, when the Bridegroom with his feastfull friends
Passes to bliss at the mid hour of night,
Hast gain'd thy entrance, Virgin wise and pure.








Sonnet 10

Daughter to that good Earl, once President
Of Englands Counsel, and her Treasury,
Who liv'd in both, unstain'd with gold or fee,
And left them both, more in himself content,

Till the sad breaking of that Parlament 
Broke him, as that dishonest victory
At Chæronéa, fatal to liberty,
Kil'd with report that Old man eloquent,

Though later born, then to have known the dayes
Wherin your Father flourisht, yet by you 
Madam, me thinks I see him living yet;

So well your words his noble vertues praise,
That all both judge you to relate them true,
And to possess them, Honour'd Margaret.








Sonnet 11

A Book was writ of late call'd Tetrachordon;
And wov'n close, both matter, form and stile;
The Subject new: it walk'd the Town a while,
Numbring good intellects; now seldom por'd on.

Cries the stall-reader, bless us! what a word on 
A title page is this! and some in file
Stand spelling fals, while one might walk to Mile-
End Green. Why is it harder Sirs then Gordon,

Colkitto, or Macdonnel, or Galasp?
Those rugged names to our like mouths grow sleek 
That would have made Quintilian stare and gasp.

Thy age, like ours, O Soul of Sir John Cheek,
Hated not Learning wors then Toad or Asp;
When thou taught'st Cambridge, and King Edward Greek.








Sonnet 12
On the Same

I did but prompt the age to quit their cloggs
By the known rules of antient libertie,
When strait a barbarous noise environs me
Of Owles and Cuckoes, Asses, Apes and Doggs.

As when those Hinds that were transform'd to Froggs 
Raild at Latona's twin-born progenie
Which after held the Sun and Moon in fee.
But this is got by casting Pearl to Hoggs;

That bawle for freedom in their senceless mood,
And still revolt when truth would set them free. 
Licence they mean when they cry libertie;

For who loves that, must first be wise and good;
But from that mark how far they roave we see
For all this wast of wealth, and loss of blood.








Sonnet 13
To Mr. H. Lawes, on his Aires

Harry whose tuneful and well measur'd Song
First taught our English Musick how to span
Words with just note and accent, not to scan
With Midas Ears, committing short and long;

Thy worth and skill exempts thee from the throng, 
With praise enough for Envy to look wan;
To after age thou shalt be writ the man,
That with smooth aire couldst humor best our tongu

Thou honour'st Verse, and Verse must lend her wing
To honour thee, the Priest of Phœbus Quire 
That tun'st their happiest lines in Hymn, or Story.

Dante shall give Fame leave to set thee higher
Then his Casella, whom he woo'd to sing
Met in the milder shades of Purgatory.








Sonnet 14

When Faith and Love which parted from thee never,
Had ripen'd thy just soul to dwell with God,
Meekly thou didst resign this earthy load
Of Death, call'd Life; which us from Life doth sever.

Thy Works and Alms and all thy good Endeavour 
Staid not behind, nor in the grave were trod;
But as Faith pointed with her golden rod,
Follow'd thee up to joy and bliss for ever.

Love led them on, and Faith who knew them best
Thy hand-maids, clad them o're with purple beams 
And azure wings, that up they flew so drest,

And speak the truth of thee on glorious Theams
Before the Judge, who thenceforth bid thee rest
And drink thy fill of pure immortal streams.








Sonnet 15

Fairfax, whose name in armes through Europe rings,
Filling each mouth with envy, or with praise,
And all her jealous monarchs with amaze,
And rumors loud, that daunt remotest kings,

Thy firm unshak'n vertue ever brings 
Victory home, though new rebellions raise
Thir Hydra heads, & the false North displaies
Her brok'n league, to impe their serpent wings.

O yet a nobler task awaites thy hand;
For what can Warrs, but endless Warr still breed, 
Till Truth, & Right from Violence be freed,

And Public Faith cleard from the shamefull brand
Of Public Fraud. In vain doth Valour bleed
While Avarice, & Rapine share the land.








Sonnet 16

Cromwell, our cheif of men, who through a cloud
Not of warr onely, but detractions rude,
Guided by faith & matchless Fortitude,
To peace & truth thy glorious way hast plough'd,

And on the neck of crowned Fortune proud 
Hast reard Gods Trophies & his work pursu'd,
While Darwen stream with blood of Scotts imbru'd,
And Dunbarr feild, resounds thy praises loud,

And Worcesters laureat wreath; yet much remaines
To conquer still; peace hath her victories 
No less renownd then warr, new foes arise

Threatning to bind our souls with secular chaines:
Helpe us to save free Conscience from the paw
Of hireling wolves whose Gospell is their maw.








Sonnet 17

Vane, young in yeares, but in sage counsell old,
Then whome a better Senatour nere held
The helme of Rome, when gownes not armes repelld
The feirce Epeirot & the African bold,

Whether to settle peace or to unfold 
The drift of hollow states hard to be spelld,
Then to advise how warr may best, upheld,
Move by her two maine nerves, Iron & Gold

In all her equipage; besides to know
Both spirituall powre & civill, what each meanes, 
What severs each, thou 'hast learnt, which few have don

The bounds of either sword to thee wee ow.
Therefore on thy firme hand religion leanes
In peace, and reck'ns thee her eldest son.








Sonnet 18
On the late Massacher in Piemont

Avenge O Lord thy slaughter'd Saints, whose bones
Lie scatter'd on the Alpine mountains cold,
Ev'n them who kept thy truth so pure of old
When all our Fathers worship't Stocks and Stones,

Forget not: in thy book record their groanes 
Who were thy Sheep and in their antient Fold
Slayn by the bloody Piemontese that roll'd
Mother with Infant down the Rocks. Their moans

The Vales redoubl'd to the Hills, and they
To Heav'n. Their martyr'd blood and ashes sow 
O're all th' Italian fields where still doth sway

The triple Tyrant: that from these may grow
A hunder'd-fold, who having learnt thy way
Early may fly the Babylonian wo.







Sonnet 19

When I consider how my light is spent,
E're half my days, in this dark world and wide,
And that one Talent which is death to hide,
Lodg'd with me useless, though my Soul more bent

To serve therewith my Maker, and present 
My true account, least he returning chide,
Doth God exact day labour, light deny'd,
I fondly ask; But patience to prevent

That murmur, soon replies, God doth not need
Either man's work or his own gifts, who best 
Bear his milde yoak, they serve him best, his State

Is Kingly. Thousands at his bidding speed
And post o're Land and Ocean without rest:
They also serve who only stand and waite.








Sonnet 20

Lawrence of vertuous Father vertuous Son,
Now that the Fields are dank, and ways are mire,
Where shall we sometimes meet, and by the fire
Help wast a sullen day; what may be won

From the hard Season gaining: time will run 
On smoother, till Favonius re-inspire
The frozen earth; and cloth in fresh attire
The Lillie and Rose, that neither sow'd nor spun.

What neat repast shall feast us, light and choice,
Of Attick tast, with Wine, whence we may rise 
To hear the Lute well toucht, or artfull voice

Warble immortal Notes and Tuskan Ayre?
He who of those delights can judge, And spare
To interpose them oft, is not unwise.







Sonnet 21

Cyriack, whose Grandsire on the Royal Bench
Of Brittish Themis, with no mean applause
Pronounc't and in his volumes taught our Lawes,
Which others at their Barr so often wrench;

To day deep thoughts resolve with me to drench 
In mirth, that after no repenting drawes;
Let Euclid rest and Archimedes pause,
And what the Swede intend, and what the French.

To measure life, learn thou betimes, and know
Toward solid good what leads the nearest way; 
For other things mild Heav'n a time ordains,

And disapproves that care, though wise in show,
That with superfluous burden loads the day,
And when God sends a cheerful hour, refrains.





Sonnet 22

Cyriack, this three years day these eys, though clear
To outward view, of blemish or of spot;
Bereft of light, thir seeing have forgot,
Nor to thir idle orbs doth sight appear

Of Sun or Moon or Starre throughout the year, 
Or man or woman. Yet I argue not
Against heavns hand or will, nor bate a jot
Of heart or hope; but still bear up and steer

Right onward. What supports me, dost thou ask?
The conscience, Friend, to have lost them overply'd 
In libertyes defence, my noble task,

Of which all Europe talks from side to side.
This thought might lead me through the worlds vain mask
Content though blind, had I no better guide.





Sonnet 23

Methought I saw my late espoused Saint
Brought to me like Alcestis from the grave,
Whom Joves great son to her glad Husband gave,
Rescu'd from death by force though pale and faint.

Mine as whom washt from spot of child-bed taint, 
Purification in the old Law did save,
And such, as yet once more I trust to have
Full sight of her in Heaven without restraint,

Came vested all in white, pure as her mind:
Her face was vail'd, yet to my fancied sight, 
Love, sweetness, goodness, in her person shin'd

So clear, as in no face with more delight.
But O as to embrace me she enclin'd,
I wak'd, she fled, and day brought back my night.